66 HISTORIOAL INTRODUCTION.

both foreign and Belgic, the doctrine contained in the Palatine Cata
chism was in harmony with the Word of Grod at all points, that
there was nothing in it in this view that seemed to require change or
correction, and that it formed altogether a most accurate compend of
orthodox Christian faith3 being, with singular skill, not only adapted
to the understanding of the young, but suited also for the advan-
tageous instruction of older persons3 so that it could continue to be
taught with great edification in the Belgio churches, and ought by
all means to be retained.'⁷ WVhen we remember the ecumenical
character of the Synod, and consider the circumstances under which
this testimony and ratification were given, the whole action must be
counted highly honorable to the Catechism, as it goes also to invest
it with an authority which may well challenge the respect of the
universal Reformed Church.

The greatest attention was paid to catechetical instruction in the
Netherlands. Here, no less than in the Palatinate, it became an
institution, embracing in its operations the entire economy of educa-
tion and religion. It must begin in the family, go forward in the
school, and perfect its work finally in the great congregation, as a
necessary discipline for both young and old. The pastors must
faithfully keep up the afternoon service on the Catechism every
Sunday, besides visiting the schools frequently, and holding cate-
chetical exercises, once a week if possible, in private houses. It
became a sort of standing sneer with the Remonstrants, that the book
was made to be of canonical authority. The Bible might be, indeed,
the ultimate rule of faith and practice in Holland; but good care was
taken by the National Church, that it should be the Bible only as
read and construed through the Heidelberg Catechism.

It is easy to understand how this system of catechetical teaching,

 

 

 

