HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION. 1 9

tended here to the persecuted exiles of the Reformed Churches of the
N etherlands, England, and F rance, when all Germany besides treated
them with cold indifference or cruel scorn—some even going so far as
to stigmatize them “martyrs of the devil.’' Friendly relations were
cultivated with foreign Protestants; men of acknowledged Zuinglian
and Calvinistic views were openly patronized, and put into places of
power and trust3 and altogether the idea seemed to prevail, that the
Church of the Palatinate was called to hold a sort of irenica] middle
position between the Lutheran and Reformed communione, where it
might be possible for both to come together at last in the bonds of a
common faith.

The times, however, were unpropitious to any such thought as this.
It was not possible that the confessional war, which had broken out
again with such violence in Germany generally, should not force its
way also into the Palatinate. The very liberty of faith Which was
enjoyed there seemed rather to invite it; as it made room for the
presence of all factions, and the free utterance of all opinions. Luther-
anism was there of course, then, in its rigid temperament and type—-
uncompromising, intolerant, full of angry, pugnacious zeal—as well as
Lutheranism in its milder Melancthonian form. Heidelberg became in
fact a general rendezvous for all religious parties3 where they came
together, however, not as had been fondly hoped, to settle terms of
amity and peace, but only to hold promiscuous fight, as on a common
battle field, over their several subjects of difference and division.

FREDERICK THE 1³10 US.

In these circumstances it was, that on the death of Otho Henry, in
1559, the electoral power passed into the hands of Evederiele the Third,

